README.md, before:

# GoBoy

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/Humpheh/goboy.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/Humpheh/goboy)

GoBoy is a multi-platform Nintendo GameBoy emulator written in golang. 
This emulator was primarily built as a development exercise, and while still 
work in progress it should run the majority of GB games. There is also experimental
sound support implemented.

<img src="images/links-awakening.png" width="400"><img src="images/pkmn-red.png" width="400">

The program includes debugging functions which make it useful for understanding how the emulator is working or for building one yourself, such as a method for printing out opcodes and register values to the console at each step. Turning these on will slow down the emulation massively.

## Installation
```sh
go get github.com/Humpheh/goboy
```

The program has been tested on MacOS and Windows 10, and is likely to work on Linux. Building on Windows 10
requires MinGW (I recommend [msys2](http://www.msys2.org/)).

GoBoy uses pixel for control binding and graphics rendering. This requires the installation of OpenGL. Instructions on installing them can be found on the [pixels readme](https://github.com/faiface/pixel#requirements).

## Usage 
```sh
goboy -sound -rom zelda.gb
```
Controls: <kbd>&larr;</kbd> <kbd>&uarr;</kbd> <kbd>&darr;</kbd> <kbd>&rarr;</kbd> <kbd>Z</kbd> <kbd>X</kbd> <kbd>Enter</kbd> <kbd>Backspace</kbd>

The colour palette can be cycled with <kbd>=</kbd>


Other options:
```sh
  -cpuprofile string
        write cpu profile to file
  -disableVsync
        set to disable vsync
  -rom string
        location of rom file
  -sound
        set to enable sound emulation (experimental)
```

### Debugging
There are a few keyboard shortcuts useful for debugging: 

<kbd>Q</kbd> - force toggle background<br/>
<kbd>W</kbd> - force toggle sprites<br/>
<kbd>E</kbd> - toggle opcode printing to console (will slow down execution)<br/>
<kbd>7,8,9,0</kbd> - toggle sound channels 1 through 4.

### Saving 
If the loaded rom supports a battery a `<rom-name>.sav` (e.g. `zelda.gb.sav`) file will be created next to the loaded rom containing a dump of the RAM from the cartridge. A loop in the program will update this save file every second while the game is running.

## Testing
GoBoy currently passes all of the tests in Blargg's cpu_instrs test rom.

<img src="images/cpu-instrs.png" width="400">

This rom is included in the source code along with a test to check the output is as expected (`instructions_test.go`).

## Contributing

Feel free to open pull requests to this project or play around if you're interested!

## Known Bugs 
- [ ] Sprite Z-drawing
- [x] Top half of sprite disappearing off top of screen
- [ ] Small sprites row glitch

## TODO List
- [x] MBC3 banking support
- [ ] MBC3 clock support
- [ ] Complete Sound emulation
- [ ] Speed up CPU (investigate switch vs map)
- [ ] Resizable window
- [ ] MBC4-7 support
- [ ] More colour palettes
- [ ] STOP opcode behaviour
- [ ] [Blargg's test ROMs](http://gbdev.gg8.se/wiki/articles/Test_ROMs) 
- [ ] GameBoy Color support

## Resources
A large variety of resources were used to understand and test the GameBoy hardware. Some of these include:
* <http://www.codeslinger.co.uk/pages/projects/gameboy/files/GB.pdf>
* <https://github.com/retrio/gb-test-roms>
* <http://www.codeslinger.co.uk/pages/projects/gameboy/beginning.html>
* <http://bgb.bircd.org/> - invaluable for debugging
* <https://github.com/AntonioND/giibiiadvance/tree/master/docs>
* <https://github.com/trekawek/coffee-gb>

Commit message:

Added first attempt at CGB mode.
* Partial CGB support. Can be switched on using -cgb flag before
execution.
* CGB palettes + WRAM/VRAM banking implemented.
* CGB speed switch not implemented completely.

README.md, after:

# GoBoy

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/Humpheh/goboy.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/Humpheh/goboy)

GoBoy is a multi-platform Nintendo GameBoy and GameBoy Color emulator written in go.
This emulator was primarily built as a development exercise, and while still 
work in progress it should run the majority of GB games, and some CGB games. There is also experimental
sound and colour support implemented.

<img src="images/links-awakening-dx.png" width="400"><img src="images/pkmn-red.png" width="400">

The program includes debugging functions which make it useful for understanding how the emulator is working or
for building one yourself, such as a method for printing out opcodes and register values to the console at each
step. Turning these on will slow down the emulation.

## Installation
```sh
go get github.com/Humpheh/goboy
```

The program has been tested on MacOS and Windows 10, and is likely to work on Linux. Building on Windows 10
requires MinGW (I recommend [msys2](http://www.msys2.org/)).

GoBoy uses pixel for control binding and graphics rendering. This requires the installation of OpenGL. Instructions on
installing them can be found on the [pixels readme](https://github.com/faiface/pixel#requirements).

## Usage 
```sh
goboy -sound -cgb -rom zelda.gb
```
Controls: <kbd>&larr;</kbd> <kbd>&uarr;</kbd> <kbd>&darr;</kbd> <kbd>&rarr;</kbd> <kbd>Z</kbd> <kbd>X</kbd> <kbd>Enter</kbd> <kbd>Backspace</kbd>

The colour palette can be cycled with <kbd>=</kbd> (in DMG mode).


Other options:
```sh
  -cgb
    	set to enable cgb mode
  -cpuprofile string
    	write cpu profile to file
  -disableVsync
    	set to disable vsync
  -rom string
    	location of rom file (required)
  -sound
    	set to enable sound emulation (experimental)
```

### Debugging
There are a few keyboard shortcuts useful for debugging: 

<kbd>Q</kbd> - force toggle background<br/>
<kbd>W</kbd> - force toggle sprites<br/>
<kbd>A</kbd> - print gb background palette data (cgb)<br/>
<kbd>S</kbd> - print sprite palette data (cgb)<br/>
<kbd>E</kbd> - toggle opcode printing to console (will slow down execution)<br/>
<kbd>7,8,9,0</kbd> - toggle sound channels 1 through 4.

### Saving 
If the loaded rom supports a battery a `<rom-name>.sav` (e.g. `zelda.gb.sav`) file will be created
next to the loaded rom containing a dump of the RAM from the cartridge. A loop in the program will
update this save file every second while the game is running.

## Testing
GoBoy currently passes all of the tests in Blargg's cpu_instrs test rom.

<img src="images/cpu-instrs.png" width="400">

This rom is included in the source code along with a test to check the output is as expected (`instructions_test.go`).

## Contributing

Feel free to open pull requests to this project or play around if you're interested!

## Known Bugs 
- [ ] Sprite Z-drawing
- [x] Top half of sprite disappearing off top of screen
- [ ] Small sprites row glitch
- [ ] Many CGB bugs

## TODO List
- [x] MBC3 banking support
- [x] GameBoy Color support (partial)
- [ ] MBC3 clock support
- [ ] Complete Sound emulation
- [ ] Complete CGB emulation
- [ ] Speed up CPU
- [ ] Resizable window
- [ ] MBC4-7 support
- [ ] More colour palettes
- [ ] STOP opcode behaviour
- [ ] [Blargg's test ROMs](http://gbdev.gg8.se/wiki/articles/Test_ROMs)

<img src="images/links-awakening.png" width="400"><img src="images/pkmn-tcg.png" width="400">

## Resources
A large variety of resources were used to understand and test the GameBoy hardware. Some of these include:
* <http://www.codeslinger.co.uk/pages/projects/gameboy/files/GB.pdf>
* <https://github.com/retrio/gb-test-roms>
* <http://www.codeslinger.co.uk/pages/projects/gameboy/beginning.html>
* <http://bgb.bircd.org/> - invaluable for debugging
* <https://github.com/AntonioND/giibiiadvance/tree/master/docs>
* <https://github.com/trekawek/coffee-gb>
